# Differential Inverse Kinematics Control for Mobile Manipulation

This repository contains ROS packages for control and other utilities for the
UTIAS mobile manipulator (the "Thing"). In particular, it contains the code
used for the experiments in [this
paper](https://doi.org/10.1109/CRV52889.2021.00017) (the PDF can also be found
[here](https://www.dynsyslab.org/wp-content/papercite-data/pdf/heins-crv21.pdf)).
You can also find a video [here](http://tiny.cc/crv21-mm).

This repository has been superseded by
[mobile_manipulation_central](https://github.com/utiasDSL/mobile_manipulation_central)
and is **no longer maintained**.

## Contents
1. [Robot Information](#robot-information)
2. [Software Installation](#software-installation)
3. [Packages](#packages)
4. [Simulation](#simulation)
5. [Experiment](#experiment)
6. [Development](#development)

## Robot Information

### Hardware

The robot consists of a UR10 manipulator mounted on a Ridgeback omnidirectional
mobile base. The base has a Hokuyo UST-10LX laser range finder mounted at the
front that provides a two-dimensional scan in a 270 degree arc in front of the
robot. The end effector has a Robotiq FT 300 force torque sensor mounted at the
wrist to measure the applied wrench, as well as Robotiq 3 finger gripper for
manipulation. See the
[datasheets](https://github.com/utiasDSL/mm_diff_ik/tree/master/datasheets)
for more details on each of the components.

### Software

The robot is currently running Ubuntu 14.04 on its onboard computer, so the
code of this repository is designed to be built and run on that Ubuntu version. 
If you have a later version of Ubuntu, you can emulate a 14.04 environment
using [docker](https://github.com/adamheins/mm-docker).

The UR10 is running firmware version 3.9 and communicating using
[ur_modern_driver](https://github.com/ros-industrial/ur_modern_driver), which
is deprecated. A complete upgrade of the system and dependencies to a more
recent version of Ubuntu, ROS, driver, and firmware is planned for sometime in
the future.

## Software Installation

First, install required dependencies we can get from `apt` (in the following,
`<distro>` can be one of `indigo`, `kinetic`, or `melodic`). We always need
Eigen:
```
sudo apt install libeigen3-dev
```

The robotiq packages for the gripper (more on this below) require:
```
sudo apt install ros-<distro>-soem ros-<distro>-socketcan-interface
```

Running the UR10 driver onboard the laptop requires:
```
sudo apt install ros-<distro>-ur-modern-driver
```

DEPRECATED (only do this if things don't work): Symlink to Eigen:
```
sudo ln -s /usr/include/eigen3/Eigen /usr/include/Eigen
```

Next, clone [vicon_bridge](https://github.com/ethz-asl/vicon_bridge) and
[robotiq](https://github.com/ros-industrial/robotiq) into the `src` directory
of your catkin workspace. 

Finally, you'll also need to install
[qpOASES](https://github.com/coin-or/qpOASES), which is the current QP solver
of choice for this project. Clone the repository somewhere convenient (not your
catkin workspace; it's not a ROS package). Then, to compile, simply enter the
cloned repo and type `make`. To get ROS to find the qpOASES headers, you'll
need to make some symlinks:
```
sudo ln -s <path/to/qpOASES>/include/qpOASES.hpp /usr/local/include/qpOASES.hpp
sudo ln -s <path/to/qpOASES>/include/qpOASES     /usr/local/include/qpOASES
sudo ln -s <path/to/qpOASES>/bin/libqpOASES.so   /usr/local/lib/libqpOASES.so
```

Now, clone this repository into the `src` directory of your catkin workspace.

### Generate kinematics code

Some of the kinematics code is automatically generated (from symbolic math in
Python). To generate it, you'll need some Python packages:
```
python -m pip install --user numpy sympy dill
```
where `python` is the Python executable used by your ROS installation (newer
ROS versions use Python 3).

We need to install the Python files only first, without compiling the C++ code
(since the autogenerated code is not generated yet). To do so, run
```
catkin build mm_kinematics -DSKIP_CPP_BUILD=ON
```

Then, to generate the functions:
```
cd mm_kinematics/scripts
./generate_all.sh [python_executable]
```
where you can pass the desired Python executable to use (full path or just the
command name, such as `python2` or `python3`). If not given, defaults to
`python`.

### Build

You should now be able to build with `catkin` (if you do not have
`catkin_tools` installed, see
[here](https://catkin-tools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installing.html)):
```bash
# normal build
catkin build

# with compiler optimizations (this makes it run much faster)
catkin build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
```

## Packages

Within this metapackage, we have:

### mm_control

Controllers for both joint space and Cartesian (task) space. Written in C++.


### mm_force_torque

Tools for working with the Robotiq force-torque sensor.

To run the driver for real sensor, use
```
roslaunch mm_force_torque bringup.launch
```
but note that **this must be run onboard the robot.** A very basic simulation
of the FT sensor is also available in `scripts/simulate_ft_sensor.py`.

The main utility is the script `scripts/wrench.py`, which processes wrenches
from the sensor by filtering and rotating into the world frame. This
information is then published under the topic `/mm_wrench/info`.


### mm_gripper

Very basic tools for working with the gripper.

Bring up the gripper using
```
roslaunch mm_gripper bringup.launch
```
Then command the gripper to open or close using
```
rosrun mm_gripper gripper.py <cmd> [delay]
```
where `<cmd>` is either `o` for open or `c` for close, and `[delay]` is a an
optional number of seconds to wait before executing the desired command. For
example,
```
rosrun mm_gripper gripper.py c 5
```
will close the gripper in 5 seconds, which allows me to position something to
be grabbed.


### mm_kinematics

Contains forward kinematics code in both C++ and Python for use by other
packages.


### mm_lidar

Tools for using the Hokuyo laser scanner mounted at the front of the base. The
laser scanner is automatically started by the software onboard the robot and
publishes its raw data to `/front/scan`. This package contains scripts for
processing the detections into actual positions of objects in the world frame,
primarily for obstacle avoidance.


### mm_math_util

Miscellaneous math utilities shared by other packages.


### mm_msgs

Defines custom ROS messages used by other packages in the project.


### mm_simulation

Basic simulation of the Thing kinematics in Python with a simple matplotlib
visualization. There is also a Gazebo simulation available
[here](https://github.com/utiasDSL/mm_diff_ik_gazebo).


### mm_trajectories

Trajectory generation. Generates trajectories to be tracked by the controllers.


### mm_vicon

Contains Vicon estimation code and launch files for the Vicon system. To
publish the mobile base pose from Vicon, connect to the Vicon wifi
`DSL_DroneNet_5G` (see the wiki for the password) and run `roslaunch mm_vicon
vicon.launch`.

## Calibration

Scripts for calibration can be found in `mm_control/scripts`. The calibration
routine optimizes over two SE(3) transforms, one between the base and arm, and
one at the end effector, in order to minimize the error between the forward
kinematic model and the measured EE pose.

The `collect_calibration_data.py` script moves the robot to a sequence of
configurations and records the joint angles and EE pose as measured by
Vicon (as a position and quaternion). Vicon and the joint control node must be
already running. 

Configurations to which the robot will move are specified in
`mm_control/config/calibration_configs.yaml`. When changing this file, be
careful to test in simulation to ensure there are no self-collisions! The
results of the data collection procedure are written to
`mm_control/data/calibration_data_<date>_<time>.json`.

To perform the calibration procedure, go to `mm_control/scripts` and run
```
calibrate.py ../data/<calibration_data_file>
```
(or substitute the path to whichever calibration data file you like). The
optimized transforms are written to
`mm_control/data/calibration_params_<date>_<time>.json`, where `<date>` and
`<time>` match those of the calibration data file used.


## Simulation

This repository contains a very basic simulation of the robot in
`mm_simulation`, which is just a wireframe in a 3D matplotlib plot. To use
this, run:
```bash
> roscore
> roslaunch mm_simulation simulation.launch
```

Alternatively, there is a separate
[respository](https://github.com/utiasDSL/mm_diff_ik_gazebo)
containing packages for a Gazebo simulation, which should be entirely
compatible with the controllers in this package. Assuming that repository has been installed in the workspace, built, and sourced, then instead of
```
> roslaunch mm_simulation sim.launch
```
one can use
```
> roslaunch mm_gazebo simulation.launch
```
Everything else should remain the same.

## Experiment
Steps for experiments on the real robot:

1. Connect to `DSL_DroneNet_5G` network.
2. Connect to the Thing via Ethernet.
3. Ensure ROS is configured to use the Thing as master:
   ```bash
   laptop > export ROS_IP=192.168.131.100
   laptop > export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://cpr-tor11-01:11311
   ```
   If you run `rostopic list`, you should see various topics related to the Thing
   listed.
4. Run:
   ```bash
   # on laptop
   laptop > roslaunch mm_vicon vicon.launch

   # alternatively, if Vicon is not available
   laptop > roslaunch mm_vicon spoof.launch

   # start the UR10 driver (the Ridgeback starts automatically onboard the
   # robot) and the mux node that publishes the combined /mm_joint_states
   # topic.
   # NOTE: this does usually run fine on the laptop, but can occasionally
   # generate garbage values for joint position or velocity. On the other hand,
   # running on the Thing may have time sync issues between the two computers.
   laptop > roslaunch mm_control bringup.launch

   # start the controller, e.g. differential inverse kinematics
   laptop > rosrun mm_control diff_ik

   # if using force control
   robot > roslaunch mm_force_control force.launch
   laptop > rosrun mm_force_control force.py

   # example of running a trajectory
   # inspect the file first to ensure the trajectory does what you expect
   laptop > rosrun mm_trajectories line.py
   ```

### Go Home
 Requires `bringup.launch` to already be launched and running. Run:
```bash
laptop > roslaunch mm_control home.launch config:=<config>
```
where `<config>` the name of one of the home configurations defined in
`mm_control/config/home.yaml`. If the `config` argument is omitted, it defaults
to the `standard` home position.

### Gripper
Open or close the gripper (experiment only). Run on the laptop:
```bash
laptop > roslaunch mm_gripper bringup.launch

# <cmd> is either o (open) or c (close)
laptop > rosrun mm_gripper gripper.py <cmd>
```

### Set desired force
To set the desired force at runtime, use:
```
laptop > rostopic pub /force/desired std_msgs/Float64 <value>
```

## Development

C++ code should be formatted using
[clang-format](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html) and Python code
should be formatted using [Black](https://github.com/psf/black).

C++ tests use [gtest](https://github.com/google/googletest) and Python tests
use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/index.html).
